# NCES_project
Project using a publicly available dataset to determine whether creativity has a positive impact on education.

The Nationa Center for Education Statistics (NCES) host a variety of datasets related to education. One of these is the Education Longitudinal Study, which started in 2002. ELS 2002 contains data from 10th grade students in the spring term of the 2001-2002 school year, in a national sample of 752 public, Catholic, and private schools. Approximately 26 students were selected from each school. Data includes achievement tests in mathematics and reading, as well as surveys of students, parents, teachers, school administrators, and librarians, and a facilities checklist. The ELS 2002 dataset contains thousands of data variables, some of which are restricted in the public dataset. I chose variables which we felt would be the closest measures of academic achievement and creativity. I also selected a measure of socio-economic status (SES), as this has often been shown to impact academic achievement and I wanted to be able to account for variability due to SES. The list of variables chosen is below:

1)	STU_ID: Identification code, unique to each student.
2)	BYTXRSTD (renamed as “reading”): Standardized T score of reading assessment test, serves as an estimate of achievement relative to other 10th grade students in spring 2002. Continuous variable, scaled to a mean of 50 and standard deviation of 10. 
3)	BYTXMSTD (renamed as “math”): Standardized T score of math assessment test, serves as an estimate of achievement relative to other 10th grade students in spring 2002. Continuous variable, scaled to a mean of 50 and standard deviation of 10. 
4)	BYSES1QU (renamed as “SES”): Quartile coding of socio-economic status of student’s household, based on a series of variables from both student and parents/guardians. Categorical variable with 4 levels, from lowest to highest SES quartile. 
5)	BYS44F (renamed as “creative_time”): Student response to the question “How often do you spend time on the following activities outside of school? Taking classes: music, art, language, dance” with response choices of Rarely or never; Less than once a week; Once or twice a week; or Everyday or almost everyday. Categorical variable with 4 levels.
6)	BYS41A (renamed as “music”): Student response to the question “Have you participated in the following school-sponsored activities this school year? Band, orchestra, chorus, choir.” Binary variable where students answered either “Yes” or “No.”
7)	BYS41B (renamed as “theatre”): Student response to the question “Have you participated in the following school-sponsored activities this school year? School play or musical.” Binary variable where students answered either “Yes” or “No.”


To assess the degree to which creativity may predict academic achievement, I conducted a series of linear regression models separately for math and reading scores. In these series, I incrementally added predictor variables, comparing each new model to the previous model in order to find the model of best fit. Originally, these variables were added in this order: time spent on creative activities (creative_time), participation in band, orchestra, chorus, or choir activities (music), participation in school plays or musical (theatre), and quartile code of socio-economic status composite (SES). However, I found that SES was a much stronger predictor that the other variables, so I reran the models adding SES first, then creative_time, music, then theatre. ANOVAs were conducted at every stage, with the goal of stopping model generation when models with additional variables stopped having a significantly better fit than the previous model.Adjusted R-squared and AIC values were also used to determine the best fit model.


